Hello everyone.
Welcome back to Exploring Quantum Physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
And, we're now going to start
talking about how to solve
the Schrodinger Equation, what the means,
how it's done in practice.
And, we're going to start with some simple
constructive techniques to give you a few
tools that you can use If you are stuck
in solving a quantum mechanics problem.
Sometimes a few of these simple tricks
will help you see your way through,
help you identify appropriate
scaling relations and the like.
So let's proceed.
Okay, here's the Schrödinger equation,
which you've heard a lot
about already in the course.
Psi is a wave function,
H the Hamiltonian operator.
i h bar d psi dt is H psi.
And, the precept of quantum
mechanics is that all
accessible information about the state
is contained in the wave function.
Now this is for an isolated system.
When we're talking about two interacting
systems, or of a system in a bath and
there's a lot more nuance.
But, let's just stick with simple many
body systems in the absence of noise or
thermal bath, because that in itself
is an interesting enough problem.
So, in other words,
If we know the wave function at a given
time we can just
sequentially integrate this
equation using some technique
to find it at a later time.
So, why in this era of high performance
computing and all these other
wonderful things, is anyone really worried
about solving the Schroedinger equation?
The inline quiz contains sort of
an exercise on thinking about how
you use the Schrodinger equation to
propagate the wave function forward.
So, from a formal and even a practical
perspective for various simple systems,
solutions to shorter equation
are fairly straight forward to find.
But, in real life we're encountered with
problems that involve atom
psycho ytterbium 70 electrons.
There's a system I happened to have worked
on myself with wonderful collaborators,
Marianna Safronova, Sergei Porsev,
during the past year.
And, it's motivated by
determining the corrections to
atomic transition frequency due to
the presence of a thermal background for
the application to next
generation atomic clocks.
Well, a very simple, very simple
consideration will show you that even
a crude representation of
the 70 electron wave function
on a course grid would just be
completely infeasible by today's
,and presumably just about any future,
technology we know of.
So, physics oriented approaches that
take advantage of approximations,
reasonable approximations,
I think are always going to be essential.
And so, learning how to solve the simple
systems gives one good guidance
as to what you going to have to do
to deal with more complicated ones.
Now, there are many cases in which one
needs to solve the full time dependent
Schrödinger equation is studying
non-equilibrium quantum systems.
Here is an example of an equation of,
solution of a, actually it's a non linear
shortage equation,
that describes a Bose-Einstein Condensate.
This is, these is, this is a spatial
representation of density of
an atomic cloud at various times.
And so, it's sometimes critical
to have information like this.
However, there's quite enough to
be learned by understanding how to
solve the stationary states of the system,
which underpin a lot of the important
phenomena that we see in nature.
And so, for the rest of this lecture
is going to focus on the solution for
stationary state problems.
So, here is the time independent
version of the Schrodinger equation.
The Hamiltonian operating on size and
eigenvalue,
eigenfunction of an Hamiltonian
operator with eigenvalue E.
What does is mean it mean
to solve this equation?
Well, the real life problem
that faces research physicists
is they have some material system
with an atomic molecular composition.
So, they have a good idea
of the Hamiltonian, but
then they have particles moving
subject to that in that Hamiltonian.
And, they need to find,
they need to find the eigenfunctions.
Well, in other words,
usually we know the form of interactions,
between the particles.
And, we want to find the energy, and
the wave function describes
the stationary state.
We're going to get to that, but
at first we're going to take
a slightly different approach
than is conventional,
and that is look at some
well known function psi and
see which Schrodinger
equations they satisfy.
Because if you have some experience doing
that, then you can often make your way
forward much more rapidly in
solving a practical problem.
This constructive approach,
that we're discussing now,
is actually extremely simple.
Here's, for example,
let's take a motion of a particle mass and
a potential in three dimensions.
Here's the Schrodinger equation for
that and
by the trivial mathematical transformation
you can reduce it to this form.
So, in another words,
If you know how to differentiate psi,
you can find an energy and
a potential for which it is a solution.
So, there's nothing better then
solving a Schrodinger equation.
Let's do it in the next in line example.
So, I hope you've found that was
a fairly easy problem to solve.
It just involves taking a derivative, and
now I might say that the solution
is not entirely a contrived one.
It's one that does occur in
the theory of particle scattering.
It's the basis for an important limit in
the description of atomic collisions.
Okay, so now,
back to this somewhat trivial procedure.
You put in any function and
it will solve a Schroedinger Equation.
But, usually not an interesting one.
But, it's worthwhile looking at the cases
where the interesting solutions
are obtained.
Furthermore, there
are constraints on what are allowable
solutions to the Schrödinger equation.
For example, In three dimension
D cubed R psi star psi has
got to be equal to one for
stationary state.
The probability of the net probability
of a particle being in the presence
of a potential must always be unity.
And so, there are lots of
choices of wave function here
which cannot possibly be
brought into this form.
But, let's go find some useful ones.
Okay, so
the last in line quiz simply has you take
one of the most useful font skins,
not just in quantum mechanics but
in practical mathematical
analysis of just about anything,
and find out what sort of Schrodinger
equation it is a solution of.
And, that'll be it for this lecture.
Then we'll go and apply that function,
in the following lectures.